In the centuries before American involvement and purchase of the Alaskan territory from the Russians, it had long been a land of few yet profitable natural resources, such as fish, ice, foxes and whales for Russian settlers, land speculators, and merchant companies. However, over the course of the 19th century a combination of increasing American commercial involvement in the area, friendly relations with Russia, and a growing competition between Britain and the United States set the stage for the Purchase of Alaska in 1867, by the Americans, of the formerly Russian controlled territory. Though the United States purchased Alaska because of a multitude of reasons, to a greater extent than expansionist and political drives the raw economic potential of the natural resources in the area and their trading prospects proved to be the decisive reason in the US acquisition of the territory. Between gold speculation, whaling enterprises, and the profitable fur trade, US involvement in Russian Alaska throughout the 19th century stemmed from settlers and merchants’ economic ventures. However, a driving force in the Alaskan Purchase, Secretary of State William Seward pushed for acquisition in large part due to his expansionist and nationalist sentiments. Ultimately, public perception of the purchase and House debates over ratifying the treatise proved that though there were motivations to keep political ties with Russia, the single most important reason in purchasing Alaska was in its intrinsic economic value.
	A history of trading of ice, fish, and other products that had existed between the Russians and Americans in Alaska for over a hundred years set a precedent of American involvement in the area. First established by a Russian royal charter in 1799, the Russian American Company was the descendant of Grigory Shelikhov, a Russian merchant seeking fur trading and business enterprises in the present-day Alaska area. The R.A.C. enjoyed decades of economic success mainly via the fur trade, although throughout the early 1800’s it experienced a gradual decline in profits due to diminishing fox and seal populations. As trade and exports grew in Alaska, the city of New Archangel became a maritime economic hub of trading furs and ice for the RAC. However, over the course of the first half of the 19th century, there was increasing American citizen settlement and speculation in the area. The creation of the American-Russian Commercial Company, an American company with whaling, fur trading, and fishing interests in the Pacific Northwest and its gradual expansion into Alaska punctuated the growing American interests. Over the course of the 1850’s, even during the US economic panic of 1857, the ARCC experienced an 18.7 million dollar increase in profits from the practice of Whaling, signifying the increasing economic productivity of the Alaska area to Americans.
	Growing Russian reliance on American trade and business in the Pacific Northwest set the stage for the Russian Tsarist government to be more inclined towards a peaceful and profitable agreement with the US government rather than competing British interests. Throughout the late 19th and early 20th century, Russian-American trade relations in the Alaskan territory were steady and beneficial, and during the War of 1812 those relations proved sustainable and the RAC’s dependency on American traders. Furthermore, as the US began rapid industrialization in the decades following the war, the wealth gap between Russia and the US became more apparent; in 1857, after the Crimean War, 45% of Russian Cotton imports came from the U.S., and that figure jumped to 80% the following year. 
	Between the British and American speculations and trading in the Pacific Northwest, along with further speculation about gold deposits in the Alaskan hills, Tsar Alexander II and the Russians viewed a sale to the United States as the best available option. The British Hudson Bay Company desired economic expansion into Alaska over the mid 20th century, leading to competition between British and American interests over fur, whaling, and fishing resources. Further inclining Russian Tsar Alexander II towards selling the Alaska land were speculations about gold strikes and fears of fervent American and British settlement in the event of a gold rush. Following the Fraser River Gold Strike of 1858, the British monarchy took control of the Hudson’s Bay Company directly in an attempt to wrest control of the newly more profitable area. Additionally, in 1863, Edward de Stoeckl, the Russian ambassador to the US, confirmed with a geologist the likelihood of gold in the region, which was later proved by a man striking gold in Sitka in 1866. After the Russians were defeated in the Crimean War by the British, and given their long history of mutual profitability with American interests, selling Alaska to America seemed to be the best course of action. Senator Charles Sumner of the US likened Russia’s want to sell Alaska to Napoleon’s sale of Louisiana, shedding fruitless territory to consolidate power, in Russia’s case, in the Amuria region of China.
Public reaction to the purchase of Alaska and ratification of the treatise proved that Americans had the economic benefits of newly acquired land at the forefront of their minds. For all of his part in negotiating the deal with the Russians and his efforts to pass the treaty through Congress, Secretary of State William Henry Seward did a lot as well to help sway public perception of the purchase, including promoting educational propaganda and Senator Sumner’s senate speech arguing in favor of purchasing Alaska. In a reprint remembering the days after the Purchase of Alaska in 1867, The Pathfinder of Alaska, an Alaskan newspaper, referenced a wide base of public support in the Washington and Pacific Northwest area for purchasing Alaska and the want for greater fur trading, ice exporting, and fishing possibilities. Not only did American people cite fur trades, gold speculation, and whaling as main motives for purchasing Alaska, there was support because of the trade routes that Alaska would open with China and Japan following Commodore Perry’s forced open trade policy with Japan in 1853.
In addition to garnering public support, the debates in the Senate and H.o.R. reveal widespread acknowledgement of economic opportunity in the territory. Senator Charles Sumner, an outspoken supporter of the purchase, referenced a Smithsonian sponsored expedition to Alaska and its report on the plentiful natural resources it contained. However, debates in the House and Senate did not solely focus on the resources and trading opportunity of the territory; also discussed were the political ramifications of the treaty and the US’s desire to maintain a friendly relationship with the Russian government, as was one of Charles Sumner’s two main motives for ramification, along with economic potential of Alaska. At the end of the House debates over Alaska, the two main points in favor of purchasing Alaska lied in the economic value of the nation and the wish to keep strong ties with Russia, with the former outweighing the latter and being talked about much more frequently in the House. Therefore, it can be reasonably construed that although there was concern of endangering the alliance with Russia, the foremost impactful reason for buying Alaska lay in its natural resources and trading value.
	William Henry Seward, the Secretary of State and principal driver on the American side of purchasing Alaska, held nationalist and expansionist attitudes that show his motivations in acquiring the Alaskan territory. Seward’s political career was defined by his push for American expansion into Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, and elsewhere throughout the 19th century as part of his ideas of American national superiority and manifest destiny. In an 1853 speech, he argued for greater expansion into Mexico following the Mexican-American War. In an 1846 letter written for a political campaign, he remarked that “territorial aggrandizement is irresistible,”showing his expansionist attitude. Thus, following the Civil War, Seward jumped at the chance for territorial expansion, not only negotiating the Alaska purchase but also annexing the Midway Islands in 1867 and pushing for a Hawaiian annexation treaty. Given the American population’s relative lack of knowledge of the Alaskan area and its icy terrain, many citizens and press denounced Seward’s purchase as unnecessary, leading to popular nicknames of the purchase as “Seward’s Folly” and “Seward’s Ice Box”.
	Though delayed by the US Civil war of the 1860’s and the Russian Crimean War of the 1850’s, the United States Purchase of Alaska seemed to come 50 years in the making. The gradual wealth gap and Russian dependance on US trade through American industrialization of the 19th century and increasing American involvement in the Alaskan area spelled the future of Alaskan territory. The many merchant and company ventures in the area, whether Whaling, gold speculation, Fur trading, or even ice exporting, signaled that Americans desired the Alaskan land for its natural resources and economic potential. Though not the defining reason for US purchase, the expansionist dreams of Seward only helped to accelerate the purchase. All in all, the acquisition of Alaska is representative of the national shift of American economic might, preceding the Gilded Age of Big Business and American financial superiority during WWI. Almost a microcosm of American history itself, the gradual US expansion into Alaska, via both economic and nationalistic motives, is accelerated by the manifest destiny ideals that many American citizens held throughout the 19th century. The culmination of US involvement, the actual purchase of Alaska, is indicative of a turning point in history. No longer is the US a struggling and isolationist country headed under Federalist and Washingtonian ideals, but instead transformed into a rising global power, eventually headed to triumph over the mighty British Empire, via the proxy ARCC and Hudson Bay Companies.
